In this lecture, you'll learn about our first option for inter-VLAN routing, which is to use a router
with separate interfaces acting as the default gateway for each of the different VLANs.
Before we get into the inter-VLAN routing, a quick review,
there's typically a one-to-one relationship between an IP subnet and a VLAN in the LAN campus. For example,
we'll have Engineering hosts in IP subnet 10.10.10.0/24 and that will be associated
with VLAN 10,
and then we've got a different IP subnet for Sales of 10.10.20.0/24, that's also going to have
its own associated VLAN, VLAN 20,
for example. Hosts are segregated at Layer 3 by being in different IP subnets, and they're segregated
at Layer 2 into separate broadcast domains being in different VLANs. So hosts
in different IP subnets need to send traffic via a router to be able to communicate with each other.
So in the last section, you saw how to do all of the Layer 2 VLAN configuration, but hosts and different
VLANS weren't able to communicate with each other.
So, let's look at how to fix that.
So first option, a router with separate physical interfaces in each VLAN. So here, we have got the ENG VLAN PCs,
they're represented by the purple color, and our Sales PCs are yellow.
So on the switch, we've configured our access ports to put the correct hosts into the correct VLAN.
Then, we're adding a router now as well.
In the example, the router interface, FastEthernet0/1, is going to be the default gateway for
the Engineering VLAN.
So we give it an IP address in the same subnet,
10.10.10.1, in our example here, and we configure our Engineering hosts to use 10.10.10.1
as their default gateway. On the switch, its interface FastEthernet0/1
that is connected to that interface
on the router, so we put that in the Engineering VLAN.
So, that's the Engineering side done.
We also need to configure the Sales side as well.
So we're using interface fastEthernet0/2 on the router as the default gateway there,
IP address
10.10.20.1, and on the switch, it's interface FastEthernet0/2,
on the other side of the link, we configure that as an access port in VLAN 20 for Sales.
In our example,
I'm also going to show you how you do the external routing as well.
So here, we've got interface fastEthernet0/3 on the router which is connected out to the Wide Area Network (WAN).
It's got IP address 203.0.113.1/24,
and the next hop address over on the Wide Area Network (WAN) side is going to be 203.0.113.2.
So, I'll configure a static default
route pointing to 203.0.113.2 as the next hop address.
So, let's have a look and see how to do the actual configuration.
So on our router, we've got interface FastEthernet0/1, IP address 10.10.10.1, with
a /24 subnet mask.
Remember to do a 'no shutdown' as well, and interface FastEthernet0/2, the IP address on there
is 10.10.20.1, and then our default static route to get out of the Local Area Network (LAN),
'ip route 0.0.0.0 0.0.0.0',
with a next hop address of 203.0.113.2.
So that's the router configuration,
we need to make sure we put a matching configuration on the switch as well.
So on the switch, I've got interface FastEthernet0/1, 'switchport mode access',
'switchport access vlan 10' for the Engineering VLAN, and 'interface FastEthernet 0/2,' 'switchport mode access,'
and 'switchport access vlan 20' for Sales.
So when you use the option of router with separate interfaces for different VLANs, the configuration
on the switch is just like it was a normal end host, a normal PC, that was plugged into that port.
Now, some disadvantages exist with using a router with separate interfaces. You need a separate physical
interface for every VLAN.
So unless you've got very few VLANS, it's likely that you're going to run out of available physical
interfaces on the router.
Also, traffic being routed between different IP subnets within the campus has to go up and down physical
Ethernet cables to the router. You'll see when we get to option three using a Layer 3 switch, it's slower
sending up and down the physical cables than routing it across the backplane of the switch.
That will make more sense when you see option three.
Okay, so that's all the information about our first option.
Next up, let's configure it in the lab. So you can see the topology diagram here,
it's the same set up we were using in the VLAN section.
So I've got my SW1 and SW3, which I've got some Engineering and Sales PCs attached.
ENG VLAN is 10,
the SALES VLAN is VLAN 20.
The difference is we've now added our router, R1, which is connected into SW2. FastEthernet0/0
is going to be configured as the Engineering gateway
with 10.10.10.1.
It connects to fastEthernet0/1 on the switch, and fastEthernet0/1
on the router will be the Sales gateway at 10.10.20.1.
The switch interface on the other side is fastEthernet0/2.
I've already configured all the Layer 2 VLAN configuration, so we've got trunks going end-to-end, from S1
to SW3, and I've put the PCs into the correct VLAN.
Let's just verify that first.
So I'll go on to SW1,
and if I do a 'show interface gig0/1 switchport', you can see that that is configured as
a trunk.
We're using VLAN 199 as the Native VLAN, 'show vlan brief'
I can see that I've got my Eng and my Sales VLANs configured, and the PCs have been put into correct access
ports as well. Let's check that connectivity works.
So I'll go on to ENG1,
I'll ping 10.10.10.11, which is ENG2, which is connected to the same switch,
and ping 10.10.10.12,
that is ENG3 over on SW3 on the far end.
So, our Layer 2 configuration is all up and working.
But if I try to ping a Sales PC, so I'll try to ping 10.10.20.12, which is on the same switch,
this is going to fail because I haven't configured my routing yet,
and obviously, if I ping 10.10.20.10 on SW3, that's going to fail as well.
Okay, so Layer 2 all good.
Let's configure our Layer 3 routing now.
So I'll do the router first,
so I need to go onto R1.
Let me just open up Packet Tracer here, and connect to R1, and at the command line,
I need to configure my interface for my Engineering VLAN, so I go to global config, and that was interface fastEthernet0/0,
IP address would be 10.10.10.1 255.255.255.0,
and 'no shutdown'. At interface fastEthernet0/1
for the Sales VLAN, IP address 10.10.20.1 with a /24 mask, and 'no shutdown'.
That's all I need to do on the router.
I need to configure the switch with a matching configuration. So it's connected to SW2,
and in global config, its interface fastEthernet0/1, which is connected to the Engineering VLAN
interface. So I'll make that 'switchport mode access' and 'switchport access vlan 10', and then interface
fastEthernet0/2 for Sales, I'll hit the up arrow to get 'switchport mode access' and set that to 'switchport access vlan 20'.
So, that's it. That should be my inter-VLAN routing working now.
Let's go back onto my ENG1 PC.
If I do an IP config, you can see it is set for 10.10.10.1
as the default gateway, and hopefully, if all the interfaces have come up, if I ping 10.10.20.12
on the same switch, okay, it looks like the ping is going to fail.
Probably just a Packet Tracer quirk again here.
Let's check and see if our interfaces are up on the router.
So on R1, I'll do a 'show IP interface brief',
and interfaces are up, up.
Let's also check the switch.
Well, it should be fine on the switch.
If there was a problem on the switch, it would show up here on the router as well.
But let's just double check, 'show ip interface brief',
and it was fastEthernet0/1 and  fastEthernet0/2,
they're up, up as well.
Let's try the ping again, because maybe it just took a minute.
Well, there we go,
as you can see, it was the last ping that came through, so everything was fine.
That is our inter-VLAN routing working, and I can ping to the Sales PCs over on the other side of
the network
on the other switch, that's at 10.10.20.10.
This might drop a few pings while it's doing ARP and stuff like that as well.
There we go,
we can see we get a reply there too.
And I know this is going to work for sure, but let's just double check. Let's also go onto our Sales PC
and check that it can ping across to Eng. Let's make this 10.10.10.11 now,
and wait for the ARP to resolve, and then hopefully, there we go, the second ping works.
So that's how we configure inter-VLAN routing using a router with separate interfaces.
See you in the next lecture for the next option.